update metrics ingestion doc (#2538)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/tutorials/observability/data-ingestion/metrics/_index.md

  - Why do my clusters run the Prometheus Operator?
---

> By default, all Giant Swarm clusters are equiped with [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) and a set of [Alloy](https://grafana.com/oss/alloy-opentelemetry-collector/) monitoring agents. They are used that collect and forward critical cluster and workload metrics to a central [Grafana Mimir](https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/) instance running on the management cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, all Giant Swarm clusters are equiped with [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) and a set of [Alloy](https://grafana.com/oss/alloy-opentelemetry-collector/) monitoring agents. They are used to collect and forward critical cluster and workload metrics to a central [Grafana Mimir](https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/) instance running on the management cluster.
```

> By default, all Giant Swarm vintage clusters are equiped with [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) and a set of [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) shards in _agent mode_. As for Giant Swarm CAPI clusters, those come with a set of [Alloy](https://grafana.com/oss/alloy-opentelemetry-collector/) shards instead that serve the same purpose as prometheuses in agent mode.These shards are monitoring agents that collect and forward critical cluster and workload metrics to a central [Grafana Mimir](https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/) instance running on the management cluster.

Author: Do you mean just the "vintage" word or the vintage part entirely ?

> By default, all Giant Swarm vintage clusters are equiped with [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) and a set of [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) shards in _agent mode_. As for Giant Swarm CAPI clusters, those come with a set of [Alloy](https://grafana.com/oss/alloy-opentelemetry-collector/) shards instead that serve the same purpose as prometheuses in agent mode.These shards are monitoring agents that collect and forward critical cluster and workload metrics to a central [Grafana Mimir](https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/) instance running on the management cluster.

Reviewer: The whole of vintage thing

> By default, all Giant Swarm CAPI clusters are equiped with [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) and a set of [Alloy](https://grafana.com/oss/alloy-opentelemetry-collector/) shards that serve the same purpose as prometheuses in agent mode.These shards are monitoring agents that collect and forward critical cluster and workload metrics to a central [Grafana Mimir](https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/) instance running on the management cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, all Giant Swarm clusters are equiped with [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) and a set of [Alloy](https://grafana.com/oss/alloy-opentelemetry-collector/) monitoring agents. They are used that collect and forward critical cluster and workload metrics to a central [Grafana Mimir](https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/) instance running on the management cluster.
```

Here is an example showing how to create a [ServiceMonitor](https://github.com/prometheus-community/helm-charts/blob/main/charts/kube-prometheus-stack/charts/crds/crds/crd-servicemonitors.yaml).

> This one targets a service named `my-service` in the `monitoring` namespace, and will route alerts to the `my-tenant` tenant. The manifests should be similar with any workload as long as you have a service that exposes the app's metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This one targets a service named `my-service` in the `monitoring` namespace, and will route alerts to the `my-tenant` tenant in Mimir. The manifests should be similar with any workload as long as you have a service that exposes the app's metrics.
```

kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  labels:
    ## This label is important as it is required for the metrics agent to discover it.
    ## The team name should be the name of your internal team.

>     application.giantswarm.io/team: my-team

Reviewer: That's wrong though :D We should only show the new label right?

Reviewer: Oh alright. So I think we should get rid of all the vintage stuff here and anything related to prometheus agent and just explain the new one with a link to the tenancy documentation.

I would emphasize that the tenant needs to be references in an existing grafana organization, the same way we did it for logs

Author: Yeah you're right.

  labels:
    ## This label is important as it is required for the metrics agent to discover it.

>     ## The team name should be the name of your internal team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ## The tenant name should be the name of your internal team.
```

No matter if you are using Helm Charts or GitOps and Kustomize, just put the ServiceMonitor CR next to your app and apply it in the same way. Once it's applied you can check either the _ServiceMonitors Overview_ or _ServiceMonitors Details_ dashboards, or just search for the new metrics ingested in your installation's Grafana to make sure that your containers are being scraped by the new monitoring agents.

> __Warning:__ The ServiceMonitor needs to be labeled with `observability.giantswarm.io/tenant: <YOUR-TENANT-NAME>` for the metrics agent to be able to discover it and start collecting metrics. Also, please make sure that the tenant you're setting with the label does actually exist in one of the [grafana organization CRs](https://docs.giantswarm.io/tutorials/observability/multi-tenancy/creating-grafana-organization/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
__Warning:__ The ServiceMonitor needs to be labeled with `observability.giantswarm.io/tenant: <YOUR-TENANT-NAME>` for the metrics agent to be able to discover it and start collecting metrics. Also, please make sure that the tenant you're setting with the label does actually exist in one of the [Grafana organization CRs](https://docs.giantswarm.io/tutorials/observability/multi-tenancy/creating-grafana-organization/).
```

## ServiceMonitor vs. PodMonitor

In most cases, a ServiceMonitor should cover most of your monitoring use cases but it can happen on rare occasions that a container doesn't need a service to run and it doesn't make sense to create one just for the sake of monitoring it. That's when the PodMonitor comes into action. You can find a few other examples where PodMonitor makes sense [in this discussion](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/3119) in the Prometheus Operator Project.

## Deprecated team label

As we now support multi-tenancy for metrics, you __need__ to attribute a tenant name to your servicemonitors and podmonitors to have those routed to the adequate tenant. This means that you will have to replace the `application.giantswarm.io/team: <YOUR-TEAM-NAME>` label by the `observability.giantswarm.io/tenant: <YOUR-TENANT-NAME>` one.

> For now, servicemonitors and podmonitors that only have the `application.giantswarm.io/team` label are routed to the "Giant Swarm" tenant by default.

Reviewer: @pipo02mix where can we add service and podmonitors so vale accepts them?

No matter if you are using Helm Charts or GitOps and Kustomize, just put the ServiceMonitor CR next to your app and apply it in the same way. Once it's applied you can check either the _ServiceMonitors Overview_ or _ServiceMonitors Details_ dashboards, or just search for the new metrics ingested in your installation's Grafana to make sure that your containers are being scraped by the new monitoring agents.

> __Warning:__ The ServiceMonitor needs to be labeled with `observability.giantswarm.io/tenant: <YOUR-TENANT-NAME>` for the metrics agent to be able to discover it and start collecting metrics. Also, please make sure that the tenant you're setting with the label does actually exist in one of the [Grafana organization CRs](https://docs.giantswarm.io/tutorials/observability/multi-tenancy/creating-grafana-organization/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
__Warning:__ The ServiceMonitor needs to be labeled with `observability.giantswarm.io/tenant: <YOUR-TENANT-NAME>` for the metrics agent to be able to discover it and start collecting metrics. Also, you need to make sure that the tenant you're setting with the label does actually exist in one of the [Grafana organization CRs](https://docs.giantswarm.io/tutorials/observability/multi-tenancy/creating-grafana-organization/). Any metrics that are sent to a tenant that is not referenced by at least one Grafana Organisation is not ingested by Mimir! 
```

We need to be more precise in the consequences of not setting an existing tenant.

> If you also want to collect logs in a similar manner, you can use [PodLogs](https://docs.giantswarm.io/tutorials/observability/data-ingestion/logs/#using-podlogs) which are the equivalent resource for log ingestion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also collect logs in a similar way by using [PodLogs](https://docs.giantswarm.io/tutorials/observability/data-ingestion/logs/#using-podlogs), which are the equivalent resource for log ingestion.
```

## ServiceMonitor vs. PodMonitor

In most cases, a ServiceMonitor should cover most of your monitoring use cases but it can happen on rare occasions that a container doesn't need a service to run and it doesn't make sense to create one just for the sake of monitoring it. That's when the PodMonitor comes into action. You can find a few other examples where PodMonitor makes sense [in this discussion](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/3119) in the Prometheus Operator Project.

## Deprecated team label

As we now support multi-tenancy for metrics, you __need__ to attribute a tenant name to your servicemonitors and podmonitors to have those routed to the adequate tenant. This means that you will have to replace the `application.giantswarm.io/team: <YOUR-TEAM-NAME>` label by the `observability.giantswarm.io/tenant: <YOUR-TENANT-NAME>` one.

> For now, servicemonitors and podmonitors that only have the `application.giantswarm.io/team` label are routed to the "Giant Swarm" tenant by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For now, servicemonitors and podmonitors that only have the `application.giantswarm.io/team` label are routed to the "Giant Swarm" tenant by default.

```

You need an empty line at the end of the file for the "severe problems" down there

No matter if you are using Helm Charts or GitOps and Kustomize, just put the ServiceMonitor CR next to your app and apply it in the same way. Once it's applied you can check either the _ServiceMonitors Overview_ or _ServiceMonitors Details_ dashboards, or just search for the new metrics ingested in your installation's Grafana to make sure that your containers are being scraped by the new monitoring agents.

> __Warning:__ The ServiceMonitor needs to be labeled with `observability.giantswarm.io/tenant: <YOUR-TENANT-NAME>` for the metrics agent to be able to discover it and start collecting metrics.

Reviewer: We also need a warning to explain that the tenant needs to be in a grafana organization right?

Author: Good point

Author: That's done. WDYT ?

## ServiceMonitor vs. PodMonitor

> In most cases, a ServiceMonitor should cover most of your monitoring use cases but it can happen on rare occasions that a container doesn't need a service to run and it doesn't make sense to create one just for the sake of monitoring it. That's when the PodMonitor comes into action. You can find a few other examples where PodMonitor makes sense [in this discussion](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/3119) in the Prometheus Operator Project.

Reviewer: And I think we need to add a link to the podlogs?

Author: I saw that in the issue but I'm not sure what link we're trying to make between those 2

Reviewer: I think the goal is more for navigation purposes,  like if you want to also collect logs, go there kind of thing

Author: Oh ok

Author: :heavy_check_mark:
